---
title: 'Elm First Impressions'
path: '/writing/elm-first-impressions'
description: 'My impressions of Elm while building the customary To Do application.'
tags: elm functional-programming
keywords: ['todo']
---

I have been interested in functional programming languages, particularly Elm,
for a while but have been hesitant to take the plunge and build something with one.
After listening to quite a few episodes of [Elm Town](https://elmtown.github.io/) and watching some talks on Elm,
I decided to make the customary To Do application.
I know. You can't get much more cliche than your first application with a new language being a To Do app,
but it allows you to test out the language relatively quickly.
You can find my code [here](https://github.com/RyanWillDev/elm-todo).

## The Development Experience

When writing Elm code I spent quite a lot of time trying to appease the compiler.
I would make a change to the code and the compiler would tell me I did something wrong.
I'd make another change and the compiler would become angry again.

It was a vicious cycle.

You may think this would slow your development down tremendously. Well... You're right. It does, but the pay off is worth it.
After I won my first major battle with the compiler and my app finally rendered in the browser,
the first thing I did was open the dev tools and start clicking around.
I did not believe the compiler when it told me everything was fine.

Coming from the JavaScript world, I was sure there was a runtime exception waiting to be thrown.
I just needed to find it.
But after a few minutes of adding and completing to do's I could not break my app.
The compiler was right.

With Elm you have a pretty strong guarantee that if your code compiles it will run without error.
This guarantee is made possible by Elm's type system and compiler working together to minimize the number of
mistakes you make while building your application.

## The Type System

The type system was one of the main reasons I was interested in Elm and other functional languages.
The ability to describe and model your data in a more meaningful way was very appealing.
It is like being able to communicate with your application on a deeper level by describing exactly what you want
the shape of your data to be.

For instance, in my to do application I define a to do as such:

```elm
type alias Todo =
  { title : String
  , completed : Bool
  , id : Int
  }
```

Comparing that to JavaScript, all we would have to work with is an object with default values.

```javascript
const todoModel = {
  title: '',
  completed: false,
  id: 0,
};
```

The type alias above does not seem particularly special at first, but the power becomes evident once you begin to leverage
that definition throughout the application.

One example is how the Todo type is used inside the model's type definition.

```elm
type alias Model =
  { newTodoTitle : String
  , todoList : List Todo
  , currentFilter : Filter
  , prevId : Int
  }
```

As you can see above, I was able to tell the Elm program that the todoList was not only a list but that the list was
to contain only Todo's. Now Elm knows exactly what I want my list to contain.

Having never worked with a statically typed language before Elm's syntax and features took a little getting used to.
Fortunately the Elm community and Evan Czaplicki, the creator of Elm, are focused on making Elm easy to use.
This means that while there is a slight learning curve to Elm it is not as drastic as other languages.

One of the biggest benefits of Elm's type system is it encourages you to spend time up front determining the
structure of your application.
As developer's, we tend to want to get our hands on the keyboard and start building something as quickly as possible, which
can cause us to neglect forethought and planning.
It is nice to have something to remind you that those things are necessary.

## The Elm Architecture

Elm web applications have a preferred structure known as the Elm Architecture.
It consists of a series of functions (model, view, and update) that describe your app and the way it can change.

A **very** brief explanation of the Elm Architecture is the model holds the data/state of your application,
the view function describes to the Elm virtual DOM what to render,
and the update function receives messages from the view and returns a new model describing the updated state of your application.

Having used Redux before and knowing it was inspired by the Elm Architecture, I had a basic understanding of what was going on.
Unlike with Redux, you do not have to wire together the Elm Architecture. The language takes care of that for you.
Honestly, this bothered me a little when starting on my app. I wanted to understand what was going on behind the scenes.
Once I accepted that Elm would take care of connecting things, working with the Elm Architecture was very pleasant.

## The Tooling

I want to start by saying the tooling around Elm is pretty great.
The packages for the Atom editor add a lot of cool features for working with Elm.
I really enjoyed the inline compiler errors provided by the [Elm Linter](https://atom.io/packages/linter-elm-make),
the autocompletion provided by [Elmjutsu](https://atom.io/packages/elmjutsu),
but by far my favorite was [Elm Format](https://atom.io/packages/elm-format).

Coming from a JavaScript background the formatting of Elm was a little strange at first.
The ability to just throw some Elm code on the page hit cmd-s and have Elm Format take care of the formatting
was great. It allowed me to maintain focus on trying to solve the current problem instead of getting caught up with formatting.

I also found [Elm Reactor](https://github.com/elm-lang/elm-reactor) to be an invaluable tool while working with Elm.
To have your code compiled on the fly and see your changes reflected in the browser made developing with Elm
almost as easy as modern JS development.
